Chapter 1: Steps in Character Creation 


class as a sort of stereotype. For instance, all war¬ 
riors in books and movies have some features in 
common and those specific features, translated 
into the D&D® game terms, are what make up 
the fighter character class. 

The player character (PC) classes available for 
you to choose include four human classes (cleric, 
fighter, magic-user, thief), three demihuman 
classes (dwarf, elf, halfling), and two special 
character classes (druid, mystic). 

You've probably noticed that the names of the 
demihuman character classes sound more like 
race or species names than professions. That's 
because demihumans are more limited in their 
options than humans are, so the entire race can 
be represented by a single character class. 

Types of Character Classes 

Most characters will be humans. In most D&D 
game campaigns, humans are the most wide¬ 
spread of all intelligent beings. Any new charac¬ 
ter can belong to one of the human classes 
(cleric, fighter, magic-user, thief), regardless of 
his ability scores. 


Character Classes and Ability Requirements 
Table 

Character 

Prime 

Other 

Class 

Requisite(s) 

Requirements 

Cleric 

Wisdom 

None 

Fighter 

Strength 

None 

Magic-User 

Intelligence 

None 

Thief 

Dexterity 

None 

Dwarf 

Strength 

Constitution 9 

Elf 

Strength, 

Intelligence 

Intelligence 9 

Halfling 

Strength, 

Dexterity 

Dexterity 9, 
Constitution 9 

Druid 

Wisdom 

Neutral align¬ 
ment, obtain 

9th level as a 
cleric 

Mystic 

Strength, 

Dexterity 

Wisdom 13, 
Dexterity 13 


Demihuman characters (dwarf, elf, and half- 
ling) should be a little less common: these races 
are supposed to be somewhat reclusive and mys¬ 
terious. They are known as "demihumans" be¬ 
cause they are so similar to humans. Each 
demihuman character class has specific ability re¬ 
quirements. If a newly created character doesn't 
have high enough scores in some specific abili¬ 
ties, he can't belong to the demihuman classes. 

The special character classes (druid and mys¬ 
tic) technically belong in the set of human char¬ 
acter classes, but they have such stringent 
requirements and unusual guidelines that 
they're set aside for you to look at separately. 
The DM might not want to use them in his cam¬ 
paign; it's easier for him to make and enforce 
this decision if they're set aside. 

Descriptions of Character 
Classes 

A Cleric is a human character who has dedi¬ 
cated his life to a great and worthy cause. Often, 
this cause is the cleric's alignment. A Lawful cler¬ 
ic, for example, would be dedicated to spreading 


law and order throughout the campaign world. 
The cleric wields magic, and he can use almost as 
many weapons and armor types as a fighter. The 
cleric's prime requisite is his Wisdom. 

A Fighter is a character whose main skill is his 
prowess at arms. A fighter can be a heavily ar¬ 
mored knight or a lightly armored swashbuckler, 
but it's his extraordinary skill in combat that 
makes him special. In the game, a fighter's 
prime requisite is his Strength. 

A Magic-User is a character who wields magic. 
He has little or nothing in the way of fighting 
ability, and in the early part of his career he has 
little in the way of magical ability either. But as 
he gains in experience, he becomes a powerful 
character and can wield powerful magical spells. 
The magic-user's prime requisite is his Intelli¬ 
gence. 

A Thief is a character who has spying abilities. 
Whether he actually makes his living stealing 
from other people, he has many skills appropri¬ 
ate to that livelihood. He can move stealthily, 
climb sheer surfaces, pick locks, and so forth. He 
has combat abilities better than a magic-user's, 
but he's not a strong combatant. The thiefs 
prime requisite is his Dexterity. 

A Dwarf is a sturdy, squat demihuman. He re¬ 
sembles the fighter in many details, but has 
many special abilities—and special restrictions— 
that set him apart from human fighters. The 
dwarfs prime requisite is his Strength. Also, a 
dwarf character must have a Constitution score 
of 9 or more. If the character you're creating has 
a Constitution of 8 or less, he cannot be a dwarf. 

An Elf is a lean, nimble demihuman. He is a 
very capable combination of the fighter and 
magic-user classes. He's not quite as tough as a 
human fighter, nor will he ever achieve the great 
magical ability of a human magic-user, but he 
does have most of the abilities of both classes. 
He has other special abilities and restrictions that 
set him apart from the human classes. The elf 
has two prime requisites: Strength and Intelli¬ 
gence, and the Intelligence score must be 9 or 
more. If the character you're creating has an In¬ 
telligence of 8 or less, he cannot be an elf. 

A Halfling is a small demihuman. He has 
many abilities similar to a fighter, but he is also 
noted for his ability in woodsmanship. He's not 
as tough as a fighter, and he has special abilities 
and restrictions that set him apart from the 
fighter class. The halfling has two prime requi¬ 
sites: Strength and Dexterity, and the Dexterity 
score must be 9 or more. Also, a halfling charac¬ 
ter must have a score of 9 or better for his Consti¬ 
tution. 

A Druid is a special type of spellcaster who de¬ 
votes himself to the needs and preservation of 
Nature. However, you can't start a character off 
as a druid. A druid character must start off as a 
cleric—in fact, as a cleric of the Neutral align¬ 
ment (alignments are discussed in Step 9, 
"Choose Character Alignment")—and earn a 
lot of experience (up to 9th experience level) as a 
cleric. Only at that point can he become a druid. 

A Mystic is a type of warrior-monk. He lives a 
monastic life, devotes himself to philosophy and 
the mastery of his physical body, and trains him¬ 
self to become a master of unarmed fighting. 
Mystics are not appropriate to all campaigns, so 
the DM has the option of refusing to allow mys¬ 
tics in his world. The mystic's prime requisites 


are Strength and Dexterity. Also, a mystic char¬ 
acter must have scores of 13 or better in both his 
Wisdom and Dexterity abilities. 

All these character classes will be described in 
greater detail in Chapter 2. If you don't yet 
know enough about these classes to decide what 
your new character should be, you can skip 
ahead to Chapter 2, then return here and make 
your choice. When you've decided what charac¬ 
ter class your character will be, continue with the 
next step. 
